A three-phase model for simulation of heat transfer and melt pool behaviour in laser powder bed fusion process. Laser powder bed fusion ( LPBF ) is one of the most promising additive manufacturing technologies to fabricate high quality metal parts. In this work, a three-phase model based on the volume of fluid ( VOF ) is employed to investigate the heat transfer and melt pool behaviour in LPBF. Surface tension, Marangoni effect and recoil pressure are implemented in the model, and heat adsorption, reflection and transmission are fully considered. The results show that the melt pool dimension and its shape are controlled by laser power and scanning speed. Metal powders at the bottom layers may be not fully melted, and for larger layer thickness of the powder bed, porosities caused by the trapped gas can form. The gas originated from bulk powders can dissolve, coalesce, and be squeezed in the melt pool. It is demonstrated that the model can capture the main features of powder melting and solidification in LPBF process. Additive manufacturing ( AM ) is an advanced manufacturing technology which fabricates complex components by adding materials layer-upon-layer. Due to its advantages in freeform fabrication, AM is heralded as the next industrial revolution, and the global AM products and services market grow rapidly. As one of the important AM processes, powder bed fusion ( PBF ) is considered to be the most practical technique for current metal manufacturing. In particular, laser powder bed fusion ( LPBF ) has emerged as one of the commercialised technologies for engineering metal fabrication, in which laser beam with high energy density is utilized to melt powders. LPBF can fabricate components with complex geometry nearly without need for further postprocessing and the production can be near full density. Hence it has been increasingly used in aerospace and biomedical sectors. Although advantages of LPBF technology have been well recognised, one of the challenges is how to manufacture components to meet the industrial high-quality standards. Defects of the final products such as balling effects, incomplete fusion holes, cracks, porosities, are serious obstacles to the further application of LPBF into the industrial practice. Generally, during the LPBF process, a melt pool is formed and the fluid dynamics is driven by different forces such as gravity, surface tension, Marangoni force and recoil pressure. Defects formation is closely related to the melt pool dynamics. For example, the molten track tends to break into droplets and balling phenomenon is generated to minimize surface energy because of surface tension. The formation of melt balls can cause high surface roughness and volumetric porosity. Even worse, it might obstruct the process of rolling a new powder layer if the size of the ball is larger enough. Furthermore, recoil pressure can lead to spattering when the temperature of the melt pool exceeds the evaporating point, and the spattering can cause voids and rough surface morphology. Advanced measurement techniques have been used to observe the melt pool dynamics. For example, Leung applied synchrotron X-ray imaging to investigate mechanisms of laser-matter interaction and solidification phenomena. It is found that gas pores can nucleate, coalesce and collapse driven by Marangoni convection and a pore bursting mechanism is proposed. Martin investigated the dynamics of pore formation during the laser bed fusion process in situ X-ray imaging, and found that pores are formed due to the collapse of a deep keyhole depression and trapping of inert gas. The experiments provide useful and reliable data for understanding pore formation, but generally conducting experiments to investigate the effect of process parameters on melt pool dynamics and product quality is time-consuming and expensive. It is also difficult to obtain the detailed microscopic information such as velocity and forces which however is crucial for fundamental understanding of the multiple phenomena involved. Mathematical modelling is an alternative method to overcome the difficulty, and it can reveal the process physics and defects formation mechanisms. Many efforts have been made in the past years for understanding melt pool dynamics by mathematical modelling. For example, Körner employed Lattice Boltzmann Method ( LBM ) to study balling effect, and found that the generated droplets are influenced by the packing arrangement of powders. Gu applied finite volume method ( FVM ) to examine melt pool behaviour, and found that Marangoni convection has a significant effect on heat transfer and melt pool characteristics. Panwisawas utilized Volume of Fluid ( VOF ) model to investigate evolution of porosity, and observed that spherical or ellipsoidal pores are formed due to different forces at the metal-gas interface. Gürtler used VOF model to study melting and solidification process, and the obtained porosity is compared with experiments. Khairallahn reported a fine-scale model and demonstrated the melt pool dynamics and formation of pore defects, spatter and denudation zones. It is found out the melt track breaks into three regions and different pore formation mechanisms are observed at different regions. Liu incorporated isoAdvector into the VOF model to capture melting interphase, and made a qualitative comparison with experiments, but the effect of recoil pressure is not considered. Furthermore, due to laser drilling and melt pool dynamics, a depression area which is similar to the keyhole in laser welding is formed and multiple reflections of laser ray occur on cavity surface. The reflected laser energy is deposited on the concave face which can affect melt hydrodynamics. However, in the literature, the laser beam energy is mostly modelled by the heat flux with a geometrical equation or a prescribed absorption profile along the powder bed. In addition, multiple reflection in the depression areas based on discrete distributed powders has not been considered. More detailed analysis of the pore formation during melting and solidification is still required for further understanding of melt pool dynamics. In this paper, a three-phase model is developed to investigate heat transfer and melt pool behaviour based on discrete distributed powders during LPBF process, in which surface tension, Marangoni effect and recoil pressure are considered. The VOF approach is used to track phase interface between solid metal, molten liquid and gas during melting and solidification process. The Fresnel reflection and adsorption models are implemented to trace the laser ray multiple reflection. The discrete transfer radiation model ( DTRM ) is applied to describe the adsorption and transmission between laser rays and the multiple phases. Heat loss due to evaporation and mass evaporation are neglected in this model. Melting and solidification of metal powders and model validation. Fig 4 shows the melting track temperature distribution for one layer of powders at different times which presents the melting and solidification process. The laser beam scans from the right to the left and powders are melted when the temperature reaches liquidus point. A continues melting track with melt pool region is formed at 20 μs. The temperature in the melt pool can be higher than 5000 K at the location of laser spot from 20 μs to 120 μs shown in Fig 4. As laser beam moves forwards, the liquid temperature behind the melting pool decreases, and the molten liquid starts to solidify from 120 μs to 390 μs when the temperature drops to the solidus point. Finally, the solidified rough surface is generated. Note that during this process, the edge of melting track, especially in the both ends of molten region, is lack of fusion due to limited laser spot energy. Incomplete melting is also caused by wetting behaviour of molten liquid, which is attributed to the Marangoni force and recoil pressure to drive molten metal flow away from the laser beam spot, thus forming a wider melt pool than laser spot diameter. The driven molten metal is expected to wet particles located at all sides of melting track as shown in the figure at 390 μs. Multi-track laser scanning may make the edge of track fully melted.2D slice snapshots of temperature distribution along the laser scanning direction are presented in Fig 5 which is a side view of Fig4. Powders are melted with the moving laser beam, finally forming a track surface. The melting pool depth can be identified from 20 μs to 390 μs. Due to heat conduction, the laser energy can be distributed to the powder bed, even to the substrate. Besides, deeper penetration of laser beam is allowed because of multiple reflection of laser beam. Hence, most of the powders along the scanning track can be fully melted. The gas initially distributed in the powder bed may dissolve in the melt pool and escape to the top of the melting track. As shown in the figures from 120 μs to 390 μs, the powders at both ends of melting track are partial melted because of the limited laser energy and wetting behaviour of melt pool. Gas is preserved in the powder bed and porosity is generated due to the incomplete melting at the start and end regions of the scanning track. Clearly, the observation shown in Figs.4 and 5 is consistent with the general understanding of the melting and solidification process, and those reported in the literature. To further quantitatively validate the thermophysical model, the calculated melt pool dimensions and solidified surface roughness for different laser scanning speeds are compared with experimental data. For comparison purpose, a uniform ordered arrangement of powders with constant diameter of 35 μm is assumed. The simulation domain is of 360 μm × 220 μm × 180 μm which consists of a 70-μm tall substrate, a 35μm tall powder bed, a 75μm tall gas region. The laser power is 175 W, and the laser spot radius is 35 μm. The laser scanning speed varies from 850 mm/s to 1450 mm/s. The comparison of melt pool width between the simulation and experimental results is presented in Fig 6. It can be seen that both simulated and measured melt pool width decreases with the increase of scanning speed. The simulated width is a little bit wider than experiment. This is because the simulation domain is much smaller than the realistic built chamber and the heat energy is not easier to diffuse to the neighbouring environment. Overall, the simulated results of melt pool width show good agreement with experimental data. Fig 7 shows the comparison of surface roughness from the simulation and experiment. It can be seen that an increase of the scanning speed gives a U-shaped curve. With the scanning speed varying from 850 mm/s to 1050 mm/s, the solidified surface becomes smoother. This is probably because the melt pool volume decreases and the stability of the melt pool increases. A relatively smoother surface morphology is obtained at the scanning speed from 1050 mm/s to 1250 mm/s. The surface turns rougher when the speed is over 1250 mm/s. This is caused by the short lifetime of the melt pool at a high scanning speed to allow the molten liquid to flow smoothly. It indicates that good surface quality can be achieved at a proper scanning speed. Although some difference of surface roughness is observed between the simulated and experimental data, generally they agree well. In conclusion, the thermophysical model presented can generate consistent data with experiments in melt pool width and surface roughness at various scanning speeds. Hence, this model can be utilized to simulate the melting and solidification process and generate reliable data for analysis of melt pool formation and its dynamics. In the literature, the effect of energy reflection on the keyhole surface during LPBF process is rarely reported. The reflection can result in an increase of laser beam energy absorption portion and a deeper penetration in powder bed. To examine the effects of multiple reflection on the cavity surface during melting and solidification, two simulation cases were carried out. one with multiple reflection and one without multiple reflection. All other simulation conditions maintain the same. The melting results are shown in Fig 8. At the beginning of melting process, the area where the temperature is higher than the liquidus point is displayed in red. It can be observed that at 21 μs and 23 μs, the temperature distribution and molten track are almost the same for the two cases. Besides, the molten metal is driven out from the melt pool due to the recoil pressure and a concave region is generated which is similar to the welding keyhole. With the laser scanning time increasing, more and more melted parts are pushed out from the melt pool. Comparing the results at 25 μs, 28 μs and 31 μs, more molten metals are melted and squeezed to the powder bed when multiple reflection is applied. This is because of the fact that multiple reflection of laser ray occurs on the cavity surface and the laser beam energy coming from the gas to the solid is reflected back to the gas and transmitted onto the solid when the concave surface is produced. Laser power and scanning speed are two significant process parameters in LPBF which determine the energy source input to the system. The effects of laser power and scanning speed on thermal behaviour and melt pool dimensions are investigated here. The laser scanning direction in the simulation is along the X-axis from the positive to the negative direction. Fig 10 shows the temperature distribution along the middle of the melting track at different laser powers. It can be seen the temperature increases with the increase of laser power due to more energy input and adsorption in the powder bed. The peak temperature has a growth from 1593 K to 2561 K when laser power rises from 100 W to 250 W. As the laser moves forwards, the temperature decreases behind the melt pool and solidifies when temperature falls to solidus point. Furthermore, higher laser powers have steeper curves both in the front and rear part of the melt pool, which means the temperature gradient grows with the increase of laser power along the melting track. In addition, the temperature gradient at the back of melting track is smaller than that at the front region. The influence of scanning speeds on the temperature along the melting track is shown in Fig 10. Note that higher scanning speed provides less time for laser-powders interaction and relative lower energy absorption by the power bed. Hence, the temperature along the melting track decreases with the increase of scanning speeds. For example, the maximum temperature drops from 7663 K to 1881 K as the scanning speed increase from 1000 mm/s to 2500 mm/s. In addition, the effect of scanning speeds on temperature gradients is not obvious as laser powers. The temperature gradient in the front of melting track is slightly higher than that in the rear side. Fig 11 shows the melt pool dimensions at different laser powers. Clearly, an increase of the laser power enlarges the melt pool size due to the enhanced energy input to the system, and more powders are melted. When the laser power varies from 100 W to 250 W, the melt pool's length, width and depth range from 69.5 μm, 23.3 μm and 10.9 μm to 278.8 μm, 94.7 μm and 52.4 μm, respectively. Effect of the laser scanning speed on the melt pool size is illustrated in Fig 11. As described above, with the increase of scanning speed, less energy is absorbed by powders due to the shorter interaction time between laser spot and powder bed, which leads to the decrease of melt pool width and depth. For example, the pool's width and depth fall from 74.0 μm and 62.9 μm to 56.2 μm and 44.7 μm when the laser scanning speed increases from 1000 mm/s to 2500 mm/s. The increase of the scanning speed gives rise to melt pool length varying from 128.0 μm to 256.8 μm. This is because laser moves a longer track at the higher speed and more metal powders are melted in the scanning direction. In addition, the effects of linear energy density which combines both laser power ( P ) and scanning speed ( v ) on the melt track temperature distribution and melt pool dimension are also investigated. The higher value of the LED, the higher intensity of laser energy is induced to the powder bed. Fig 12 shows the temperature distribution along the middle of the melting track at different LEDs. With the increase of the LED, the temperature profile along the melt track moves upwards. The maximum temperature increases significantly from 1593 K to 7663 K when the LED increases from 0.05 Jmm−1 to 0.2 Jmm−1 because of the enhanced energy intensity input. The melt pool dimensions at different LEDs are shown in Fig 12. An increase of the LED enlarges the melt pool size. The melt pool's length, width and depth range from 69.5 μm, 23.3 μm and 10.9 μm to 296.1 μm, 109.3 μm and 64.6 μm, respectively as the LED increases from 0.05 Jmm−1 to 0.2 Jmm−1. This is because relative higher energy is absorbed by the powders at a higher LED value, thus converting more solid to molten liquid. Porosity or relative density of the final manufactured product is related to the LED. The process window of the LED for Ti6Al4V is between 0.125 Jmm−1 and 0.167 Jmm−1, which can produce fully dense part. At the same level of the LED, the combination of higher laser power and higher scanning speed presents smaller porosity, and unmelted powders are entrapped in the porosity produced at the combination of lower laser power and lower scanning speed. In LPBF process, the layer thickness is one of important operation parameters, and varies from 20 μm to 100 μm. In this section, the effect of the layer thicknesses on the thermal behaviour and gas pores evolution is examined. The layer thicknesses considered are 20 μm ( 1dp ), 40 μm ( 2dp ) and 60 μm ( 3dp ) where dp is the diameter of powders. Fig 13 shows the temperature distribution along the middle melting track during the melting and solidification process at different layer thicknesses. With the increase of layer thickness, much more laser energy is absorbed by the powders, thus reducing the temperature of substrate for the period of 100 μs to 400 μs. For the case of 60 μm, the laser energy is mostly distributed on the powder bed due to the heat conduction between particles. In Fig 13, the input heat source is large enough to fully melt the 20 μm layer-thickness powder bed; for 40 μm powder bed, the bottom metal powders are not fully melted. Porosities are formed at the end of the track shown in Fig 13 at 400 μs because of insufficient laser energy. In Fig 13, due to limited energy source, incomplete melting is serious which can be seen at 100 μs and 180 μs at the bottom part of the powder bed. The gas presented among the powder particles can dissolve in the melt pool at 100 μs, 180 μs and 240 μs, and small gas pores can coalesce into larger piece as demonstrated in Fig 13 at 100 μs. Most dissolved gas may escape from the molten metal and is released to the inert atmosphere as shown in Fig 13 from 100 μs to 400 μs. However, due to the rapid solidification rate and limited laser energy, some gas at the bottom of the powder bed is trapped, hence leading to porosity defects. In order to trace more details about the porosity generation at the layer thickness of 60 μm, the evolution of the gas pores in some enlarged region from 110 μs to 170 μs is illustrated in Fig 14. It can be observed from the middle region of powder bed that as the laser moves forwards, gas pores originated from the powder bed can dissolve in the melt pool. The dissolved gas has the tendency to coalesce as shown in Fig 14 at 120 μs. Hence, small gas pores coalesce into to a lager one at 130 μs. Comparing the gas behaviour at 130 μs and 140 μs, it can be seen the merged gas pores could be squeezed into smaller one by the dynamic molten metal, thus reducing the volume of gas pores as shown at 160 μs. In addition, the gas pores are carried forwards along the melt track by the molten metal. The gas pores can also rise to the melt pool surface and escape into the chamber atmosphere as shown at 170 μs. For the bottom gas in the powder bed, it can also coalesce to larger one shown from 140 μs to 160 μs. Due to limited laser energy, these parts could not dissolve completely and escape from the melt pool at the beginning of the scan track, thus forming porosities shown at 180 μs in Fig 13. In this work, a three-phase model is developed to investigate heat transfer and melt pool behaviour in the LPBF process. The models used including VOF, mass, momentum and energy governing equations are described in detail, and validated by literature experimental data. The effects of the key variables including laser power, scan speed and powder layer thickness on melt pool dynamics are examined and analysed. The conclusions drawn from the present work are given below. The three-phase model proposed can capture the thermal behaviour during the melting and solidification process, and the simulated results agree well with experiments data in melt pool width and surface roughness at different scanning speeds. The edge of the melting track is lack of fusion due to the thin layer thickness. Incomplete melting is also caused by wetting behaviour of molten metal, which is attributed to the effect of the Marangoni force and recoil pressure. Powders at the beginning and the end of melting track are partially melted and the porosity is generated correspondingly. The effect of heat multiple reflection is considered in the model, and the results show that more metal powders are melted and driven from the concave region by multiple reflections compared with the case without reflections. A deeper depression region is produced in the case with multiple reflection. The melt pool dimensions increase with the increase of the reflection coefficient. The temperature along the melting track increases with the increase of laser power, and decreases with the increase of scanning speed. The increase of the laser power enlarges the dimensions of melt pool, including length, width and depth. With the increase of scanning speeds, the melt pool width and depth decrease while the melt pool length increases. For the powder bed with larger layer thickness, bottom metal powders are not fully melted because of insufficient laser energy. Porosities formed by the trapped gas is obvious for thick powder beds due to rapid cooling rate and limited laser energy. The gas originated from the bulk powders can dissolve, coalesce, and be squeezed in the melt pool, and most of gas can escape from the molten metal. The simulation results have demonstrated that the three-phase model proposed can capture the key flow and heat transfer characteristics in melting and solidification process in LPBF. However, there are still some limitations of the model which needs further improvement. For example, the phenomena related to the liquid metal evaporation and the interaction between laser ray and vapor are not implemented in the model. The studies regarding the effects of model parameters related to powder physical and thermal properties and the effects of Marangoni convection or recoil pressure are still lacking. These limitations will be further addressed in our future work
Achieving Ti6Al4V alloys with both high strength and ductility via selective laser melting. Improving the ductility of manufactured Ti-based alloys by selective laser melting ( SLM ) while still maintaining the high mechanical strength is one of the major challenges in additive manufacturing. In this work, a systematic investigation on the process parameters for achieving such a material is performed. By employing the optimal parameters during SLM, the fabrication of strong and ductile Ti6Al4V alloys was achieved. The ultimate tensile strength of SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloy was measured as 1170 MPa, while the elongation to failure remained over 10%. Through analysis of the microstructure and mechanical properties of the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloy, it was found that the process parameters play an essential role in the tensile behavior, in particular the ductility of SLM-built Ti alloy. The considerable enhancement of the mechanical properties in our work is mainly attributed to the limitation of martensite formation and the minimization of pores. Additive manufacturing ( AM ) has drawn increasing attention owing to its design flexibility, high liberalization during manufacturing, low material waste and excellent forming accuracy. As one of the essential Ti alloys, Ti6Al4V is widely used in a variety of fields ranging from biomedicine to the aerospace industry. However, the fabrication of Ti6Al4V alloys with complex geometry is still challenging when conventional machining or casting approaches are employed. AM technologies, such as selective laser melting ( SLM ), have been successfully employed to manufacture Ti6Al4V alloys with complex geometries. Although Ti6Al4V is considered as an easy-to-fabricate material by SLM process, the rapid solidification and high temperature gradient within the melting pool during SLM result in the structural defects such as pores, cracks, unmelted particles and high residual stresses. These defects can considerably limit the mechanical performance of the alloy. Furthermore, SLM manufactured Ti6Al4V alloys exhibit fine martensitic microstructure that have high strength but with ductility noticeably below the minimum threshold of 10% suggested for critical structural applications. As a consequence, a majority of reported work has focused on the improvement of the ductility for SLM-built samples. Post-process treatment was commonly employed for SLM manufactured components to remove the as-built residual stresses and therefore improve ductility. Yan reported that through the hot isostatic pressing ( HIP ) a maximum tensile elongation of 19% was achieved. This enhanced elongation to failure was mainly attributed to the elimination of internal defects. However, a weaker ultimate tensile strength of 840 MPa was seen in the HIP-treated specimens. Heat treatment was also employed to improve the ductility of SLM-built Ti6Al4V yielding an elongation to failure of 14%, which was considerably higher than that built vis SLM, while the tensile strength after heat treatment decreased to 840 ± 27 MPa. Other alternative approaches during SLM were reported to address the concern of poor ductility of as-built samples. For instance, in order to reduce the thermal gradient in the SLM process, in-situ powder bed preheating was carried out to enable an improvement of the strengthen and ductility of SLM-built samples. Pal discovered that the ductility of SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys depends upon the building orientation and the input energy density, while the maximum elongation at break achieved 7.5% with optimized parameters. In-situ martensite decomposition was also found to be a potential method to achieve high yield strength and good elongation of failure through transforming the undesired martensitic structure into an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure. Keeping the above investigations in view, an increase in the metal ductility regularly resulted in compromising the tensile strength, falling into the so-called strength-ductility trade-off. Thus, manufacturing ductile Ti6Al4V alloys without compromising other essential properties, especially the tensile strength, remains a major challenge for SLM process. In this work, a systematic investigation of system parameters, including laser power and scanning speed, on the mechanical properties of the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloy was carried out. An alloy with both high strength and adequate ductility was achieved. Via microstructure characterization, compositional analysis and mechanical test, the reinforcement mechanism of the SLM-built samples is understood and explained herein. Selective laser melting of Ti6Al4V alloys. Spherical Ti6Al4V powder with a grade of LaserForm Ti Grade 23 provided by 3D Systems was used as the feedstock powder. As shown in Fig 1, the particles exhibit a nearly-spherical shape. The particle size of the feedstock powder is summarized in Fig 2a, ranging from 6 μm to 47 μm. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy ( EDS ) was employed to characterize the main elements of the feedstock powder, as shown in Fig 2b. During SLM, a commercial selective laser melting machine equipped with a 500 W fiber laser was employed to manufacture the Ti6Al4V specimens, as shown in Fig 3a. During the fabrication process, the build chamber was fulfilled with ultra-high purity argon, and the oxygen concentration was kept below 5 ppm. A stripe scanning strategy was used with the laser travelling in zigzag paths, and the stripe width of 13 mm was used. In order to decrease the thermal accumulation and the residual stresses, the stripes were scanned in "jump order" as illustrated in Fig 3b. To minimize the residual stresses and prevent the crack growth during SLM fabrication, a rotation angle of 115° was implemented between successive layers. Additionally, a laser beam of 60 μm, a layer thickness of 30 μm and a hatch distance of 82 μm were kept constant during the manufacturing of Ti6Al4V samples. Process parameters used to evaluate the effect of laser power and scanning speed on mechanical performances of the SLM-built samples are summarized in Table 1. A linear energy density was used in this work to evaluate the input energy density. Fig 3c shows the manufactured strip-like samples used for tensile tests and the cubic samples for density measurements. Microstructure characterizations. All the samples were ground, polished and then etched using Kroll's reagent, which contained 1 ml hydrofluoric acid, 1.5 ml hydrochloric acid and 2.5 ml nitric acid in 95 ml distilled water. Before structure characterization, all samples were sectioned parallel to the build direction, and the morphology of the etched samples was characterized by scanning electron microscopy ( SEM ). XRD analysis was performed with a scanning angle ranging from 10° to 100° and a scanning step of 0.02°. Archimedes' principle was used to measure the density of the SLM-built samples. The microhardness of the SLM-built samples was tested using a Vickers hardness indenter at a load of 0.2 kg and dwell time of 10 s. Each reported microhardness value was the average of 20 tests. After SLM fabrication, the specimens used for tensile test were cut off by a wire-electrode cutting machine. An electronic universal testing machine was employed to perform the tensile test at room temperature. The "dog-bone" shape specimen with a gauge length of 20 mm was used in this study, as shown in Fig 4. The tensile axis of each specimen was along the sample length, which was perpendicular to the build direction. The total elongation was determined by measuring the length of the fractured specimens. The fracture mechanism was exploited by the SEM characterization of the fracture surfaces. Non-optimal process parameters for Ti6Al4V alloys may result in insufficient melting of the powder particles and instabilities of the melt pool during the process. This leads to the formation of inner defects such as unmelted particles and spherical and/or sharp crack-like voids. As shown in Fig 5, the formation of the unmelted or partially melted particles as well as sharp crack-like voids is ascribed to insufficient energy input. The spherical voids are generally reported as the result of gas entrapment, or of the keyhole effect. In this work, the applied processing parameters provided sufficient laser energy and suitable overlap between the successive passes to melt the whole layer. Moreover, the low scanning speed in case V1 also guaranteed enough time for the entrapped gas to be released to the surroundings. Therefore, we believe that the presence of spherical pores in this work is correlated with excess energy input, which aligns well with findings from the literature. One explanation for the porous morphology of SLM-built samples is the evaporation of constituents with low melting points. For the Ti6Al4V alloys in this work, aluminum has a low boiling point of ~2500 °C, below the maximum temperature that occurs during SLM, which is reported up to 3200 °C in the literature. Another possible formation mechanism of the pores is that the release of the entrapped gas is interrupted by the strong fluid flow inside the melting pool. The fluid flow within the melting pool is driven mainly by the Marangoni force, capillary forces and the recoil pressure. When applying a high energy input, a high temperature gradient and thus strong Marangoni convection are formed. This results in a strong flow of both heat and matter, which would drive gas bubbles to follow the fluid flow, rather than releasing them into the surroundings. The gas bubbles will be trapped within the solidified melting pool, and form spherical voids. The density of the SLM-built samples is illustrated in Fig 6. Note that high energy input results in low energy density. Moreover, decreasing the laser power or increasing the scanning speed can achieve a density as high as 4.40 g/cm3, which corresponds to a relative density of 99.4% in comparison to the bulk density of Ti6Al4V alloys. A decrease of the density is observed when decreasing the laser power to 70 W. The factors that could be responsible for this are the presence of crack-like voids as well as unmelted particles resulting from insufficient energy input. The XRD spectra shown in Fig 7 match the hexagonal close-packed ( HCP ) structure without evident peaks of body-centered cubic structure. The HCP peaks observed on SLM-built samples can be attributed to both α and α′ phases. Peak shifts are noticed for SLM-built samples compared to that of the standard PDF card, and the variations of the peak position indicate the formation of considerable dislocations and residual stresses within the SLM-built samples. Aside from this, there is no significant change in the XRD patterns of the SLM-built samples fabricated under different process parameters. Fig 8 displays the low- and high-magnified SEM morphologies of etched Ti6Al4V samples. The pores with spherical shape and a nearly smooth inner surface are observed under low scanning speed, as shown in Fig 8a. The optimized scanning speed instead results in densified microstructure with the minimization of those spherical pores, as shown in Fig 8c. The magnified microstructure of the SLM-built samples possesses an amount of acicular α′ martensite, which has been reported as a consequence of rapid cooling inherent to the SLM process. Bright particles are observed from the back-scattered electron ( BSE ) image shown in Fig 9. Similar bright particles reported in the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys were characterized as the β phase, contributing positively to the mechanical performances of Ti6Al4V alloys. The microhardness evolution of SLM-built samples manufactured under different processing parameters is presented in Fig 10. The data reveals that the microhardness increases progressively with an increase of laser power. The microhardness achieves 364 HV under a high laser power. From Fig 10b, it is found that a high scanning speed leads to a low hardness. This decreasing trend of microhardness when increasing the scanning speed has been reported in the literature. Despite the presence of nano β particles shown in Fig 9, there is no evident peak of β phase in the XRD result. It is thus reasonable to assume that the presence of β phase rarely contributes to the hardness values of the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys in this work. The final hardness of SLM-built Ti6Al4V samples is dominated by the fraction of α′ phase, and thus can be calculated as follows. Detailed stress-strain curves are plotted in Fig 11 to evaluate the tensile properties of SLM-built specimens. By applying a gradually intensive laser power, the ultimate tensile strength ( UTS ) increases slightly from 1094 MPa to 1158 MPa, while the strain decreases significantly. Fig 11b reveals that, by varying the scanning speed from 496 mm/s to 744 mm/s, the strain increases considerably while the UTS remains constant. This suggests the possibility to fabricate high performance Ti6Al4V alloys directly through SLM as long as optimal process parameters are used. In detail, the UTS remains unchanged with an average value of 1192 ± 8 MPa, and at the same time, a great increase in the strain is observed. For metals, the total strain is attributed to the elastic stage, the strain hardening region and the necking region. It was reported that the improvement of the ductility for metals is generally achieved by delaying the onset of necking, which occurs due to plastic instability when the Hart criterion is satisfied. In terms of the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys in this work, the uniform elongation under different scanning speeds stops at almost the same point on the stress-strain curve. While the elongation after the UTS point increases when increasing the scanning speed. Therefore, the elongation after necking contributes significantly to the total strain, especially for the case with a high scanning speed. Fig 12 shows the necking of the fractured SLM-built specimens, and an evident necking is observed for the case under high scanning speed. The summary of the UTS and elongation to failure of the various samples is depicted in Fig 13, where Ti6Al4V alloys with both high strength and ductility were achieved by applying optimal process parameters. The elongation to failure in this work is comparable to the value of the stress relieved or annealed samples, whilst the UTS remains high. Moreover, the UTS and elongation to failure in this work exceed those of the wrought and cast ones. From Figs 11 and 13, it is found that the elongation to failure increases progressively by varying the scanning speed, while the UTS maintains unchanged. It is thus of interest to explore the fracture mechanism by characterizing the fracture surfaces of the SLM-built samples under different scanning speeds. The fracture morphology under low magnification indicates that the fracture surfaces are quite irregular in the central area. This was described as the region of fibrous fracture. Herein, as shown in Fig 14, the fracture morphology on the periphery of the fibrous fracture region is flatter. Discernible spherical pores with sizes in the range of tens of microns randomly locate on the fracture surface under a low scanning speed. Most of spherical pores located within the fibrous fracture region. By increasing the scanning speed, the number of the spherical pores decreases significantly, and is highly minimized while applying the scanning speed of 744 mm/s. Further up to the fracture surfaces under high magnification, one can see shallow dimples surrounding the spherical pores under the low scanning speed of 496 mm/s, suggesting a ductile rupture fracture. The dimples are slightly elongated along the tensile direction. The fractography of the SLM-built samples under higher scanning speed exhibits a rough dimple feature with enhanced depth, revealing a high plastic deformation and a strong necking. The fractography shown in Fig 14 is similar to the heat-treated samples and the HIP samples, implying the achievement of comparable elongation. Besides, the dimple size in this work is much smaller than those after heat treatment, which suggests the achievement of a better strength as shown in Fig 13. The fine and deep dimple features were also reported in the ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure of SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys, and the combination of high tensile strength and ductility of the Ti6Al4V alloys in this work is comparable to those reported. It is well known that lower/upper energy input results in the formation of pore structures during SLM process. However, the contribution of different types of pores to the fracture mechanism, and thus the tensile strength and ductility of SLM-built samples, is correspondingly different. It was reported that the sphere-like pores generated lower stress concentration factor, and thus better strength compared to the crack-like pores. Therefore, the crack-like pores formed under insufficient energy input lead to a high risk of crack initiation due to stress concentration at corner points. Consequently there is a significant decrease in tensile strength even though the elongation to failure remains high. On the other hand, the comparatively small spherical pores with the almost smooth inner surface result in high tensile strength. Additionally, the minimization or elimination of spherical pores when using optimal laser power and scanning speed result in a high elongation to failure that is correlated with visible necking for the herein SLM-built samples. In these samples, the spherical pores remain crucial in determining the ductile behavior since they are responsible for the loss of the matrix continuity in the SLM-built sample. Furthermore, the elongation to failure shown in Fig 13 varies significantly even with an equivalent density value, revealing that the densification of SLM-built samples is not the only reason resulting in the improved ductility. It has been proved that the needle-shaped α′ can lead to a serious reduction in the plasticity; therefore, minimizing the fraction of α′ phase may improve the ductility of SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys. For the Ti6Al4V alloys in this work, a high fraction of α′ phase is obtained when applying high energy input, while the high fraction of α phase achieves under low energy input, as shown in Table 2. For the cases with similar density value, the elongation to failure increases with the decrease of the fraction of α′ phase. It can be induced that, in addition to the minimization of pores, the high elongation to failure under low energy input is also attributed to the high fraction of α phase. Therefore, tailoring the phase components by varying the laser power or scanning speed and consequently the variation of energy input, is an alternative method for improving the ductility of the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloy. In general, the tensile strength and the elongation to failure are affected significantly by the shape, size, and number of the pores. Therefore, densification efforts are always valuable to improve the mechanical properties of the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys. Additionally, adjusting the fraction of α/α′ phase by varying the energy input gives the possibility to improve the ductility of SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys. The work herein proves the feasibility of tailoring these important material properties for Ti6Al4V alloys through the variations of the SLM process parameters. The mechanical properties of Ti6Al4V alloys manufactured by selective laser melting in this work significantly exceed those of wrought and cast material without need for post-fabrication heat or pressure treatments. Of particular note is that the ductility values achieved in the present work exceed those previously found in SLM manufactured Ti6Al4V alloys, while the tensile strength remains high. This work is an achievement in addressing the strength-ductility trade-off for SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloys. The strengthening mechanism is ascribed mainly to the fine and dense microstructure as well as the fraction of α and α′ phases
Additive manufacturing of strong and ductile Ti-6Al-4V by selective laser melting via in situ martensite decomposition. Novel ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) microstructures comprising ultrafine α-laths and retained β phases were created via promoting in situ decomposition of a near α’ martensitic structure in Ti-6Al-4V additively manufactured by selective laser melting ( SLM ). As a consequence, the total tensile elongation to failure reached 11.4% while maintaining high yield strength above 1100 MPa, superior to both conventional SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V containing non-equilibrium acicular α’ martensite and conventional mill-annealed Ti-6Al-4V. The formation and decomposition of α’ martensite in additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V was studied via specially designed experiments including single-track deposition, multi-layer deposition and post-SLM heat treatment. The essential SLM additive manufacturing conditions for Ti-6Al-4V including layer thickness, focal offset distance and energy density, under which a near α’ martensitic structure forms in each layer and then in situ transforms into ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structures, were determined. This is the first fundamental effort that has realized complete in situ martensite decomposition in SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V for outstanding mechanical properties. Selective laser melting ( SLM ) is a powder-bed-based additive manufacturing ( AM ) technology. As with other AM processes, SLM offers distinct advantages over conventional manufacturing, such as design freedom, free of tooling, near-net or net shape production, efficient use of materials, short lead time, and substantial cost savings in many cases. A wide variety of metallic materials have been processed to date using SLM, and Ti-6Al-4V has received prime attention as the benchmark titanium alloy because of its broad applications in industry and the associated high cost of manufacturing and long lead time. An important performance benchmark for additively manufactured metallic structural components is to achieve mechanical properties comparable or even superior to their wrought counterparts. For additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V, this requires that its microstructure must be essentially pore free and comprise proper phases that can offer strong and ductile properties. This poses great challenges to the AM of Ti-6Al-4V by SLM. Table 1 summarizes the literature data on the tensile properties of SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V, Ti-6Al-4V additively manufactured by selective electron beam melting ( SEBM ), mill-annealed ( MA ) Ti-6Al-4V and solution treated and aged ( STA ) Ti-6Al-4V. SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V can achieve yield strength over 1300 MPa, but the tensile elongation is noticeably below the minimum threshold of 10% suggested for critical structural applications. This disqualifies the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V and, accordingly, post-SLM heat treatment is often applied for ductility improvement. The mechanical properties of the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V depend largely on its constituent phases and their morphology and characteristic length scales, as well as the size and orientation ( texture ) of the prior-β grains. In view of the current standard SLM practice, which is conducted at powder-bed temperatures less than 230 °C, the resulting microstructure often features columnar prior-β grains filled with acicular α’ martensite. The elongated prior-β grain boundaries in conjunction with the presence of acicular α’ martensite favor intergranular failure. In addition, such strongly textured structures lead to significant anisotropic mechanical behavior, causing large discrepancies in mechanical response when subject to external loading along different sample orientations. Postheat treatment is thus regarded as a must-do process to transform the acicular α’ martensite into equilibrium ( α + β ) microstructures, while reducing thermal stresses at the same time. In contrast, the fabrication of Ti-6Al-4V by SEBM is often performed at powder-bed temperatures above the α’ martensitic transformation temperature, which favors the formation of α and β instead of α’ martensitic transformation. The occurrence of both α and β not only leads to a near-equilibrium lamellar ( α + β ) structure, but also breaks up the textured columnar prior-β grains alleviating the texture. As a result, the SEBM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V often exhibits better ductility than the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V, as well as improved isotropic mechanical behavior. However, the better ductility of the SEBM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V usually corresponds to lower strength, falling into the so-called strength-ductility trade-off dilemma. STA Ti-6Al-4V seems to be able to evade the strength-ductility dilemma, standing out with high yield strength at no ductility trade-off. The STA approach involves solution treatment above β transus, followed by water quenching and low-temperature aging. The resultant microstructure is composed of fine lamellar α and β with or without primary α, thanks to the decomposition of α’ martensite during aging. This raises an intriguing question: Can such strong and ductile Ti-6Al-4V be produced by SLM in the as-fabricated state?This study focuses on addressing this challenge. It is shown that, through novel fabrication design based on both phase transformation and processing optimization, in situ α’ martensite decomposition can be realized during SLM to produce an ultrafine ( α + β ) lamellar structure, analogous to that obtained by STA. Consequently, better than forged tensile mechanical properties are achieved in the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V. Table 3 summarizes the microstructure and constituent phases present in the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V, corresponding to the samples listed in Table 2. Columnar prior-β grains formed in all samples owing to the steep temperature gradients encountered during SLM. The use of 30 μm layer thickness resulted in the finest columnar prior-β grains vs. The use of 60 μm and 90 μm layer thicknesses, indicative of its fastest cooling condition. This is further supported by the acicular α' martensite ( a result of the β -> α' martensitic transformation ) observed in the resulting microstructure using the layer thickness of 30 μm. Fig 2 shows the BSE microstructures of the as-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V at the layer thickness of 60 μm as a function of the FOD, while keeping the energy density E constant at 50.62 J mm-3. At the FOD of 4 mm, the microstructure consisted of predominantly acicular α' martensite. Reducing the FOD to 2 mm led to a dramatic change in the microstructure; an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure formed, rather than the α' martensite, which had essentially disappeared. Compared with S2, extensive decomposition of α' martensite into α and β has occurred in S3 during SLM. The average thickness of the resulting α-laths was 300 nm, one order of magnitude finer than the 2-3-lm-thick α-laths in Ti-6Al-4V fabricated by SEBM. At the FOD of 0 mm ( S4 ),the ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure still prevailed, despite a small decline in its proportion. Note that the thickness of the α-laths in S4 is equivalent to that in S3. The microstructural analogy between S3 and S4 indicates that, for a given layer thickness of 60 μm and an energy density level of 50.62 J mm3, the resulting α' martensite is apt to decompose when the FOD is set in the range 0-2 mm. The dependence of the microstructure on the FOD at the layer thickness of 90 μm under the same value of E is shown in Fig 2d-f. With a shift in the FOD from 4 mm to 0 mm, the resulting microstructure varied from fully acicular α' martensite, to acicular α' with a small portion of lamellar ( α + β ), and then to an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure. Unlike the cases for the layer thickness of 60 μm, the suitable range of the FOD in favor of extensive martensite decomposition for the layer thickness of 90 μm is in the vicinity of 0 mm. This is much narrower than the FOD range of 0-2 mm for the layer thickness of 60 μm. It can be seen from comparing the microstructures shown in Fig 2 and e that the layer thickness is decisive in the determination of the resulting microstructure for SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V when other processing variables are kept constant. It is clear that through a proper selection of the SLM conditions, it is practical to achieve an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure via the in situ decomposition of α' martensite. However, it should be pointed out that other factors such as the dimension and geometry of the sample may also affect the decomposition of α' martensite through their influence on cooling rate. Research on these topics is currently in progress by the authors. The formation of the acicular α' martensite or ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure was found to be dependent on the energy density E. At the layer thickness of 60 μm, reducing E from 50.62 to 33.74 J mm3 changed the microstructure from ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) to predominantly acicular α' martensite. Similar observations were made for the layer thickness of 90 μm with a reduction in E from 50.62 to 33.74 J mm3, as evident from comparing Fig 2f and Fig 3b. Reducing E thus favors preserving α' martensite. Accordingly, to achieve an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure, it is necessary to control E during SLM. Direct observation of in situ α' martensite decomposition during SLM of Ti-6Al-4V is challenging, but indirect microscopic evidence can be extracted from purposely fabricated Ti-6Al-4V samples. In this regard, single-track deposition of Ti-6Al-4V up to eight layers was conducted. Fig 4 shows the microstructures of Ti-6Al-4V in the single-layer sample and eight-layer sample fabricated using identical processing parameters of S3. These processing variables, together with the energy density E of 50.62 J mm3 have proved to be effective in producing ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structures in Ti-6Al-4V cubes of 10 10 10 mm3. However, the microstructures shown in both Fig 4a and Fig 4b are composed of predominantly acicular α' martensite. These observations indicate that the microstructure of the additively manufactured Ti-6Al-4V by SLM under the processing condition specified above always ends up with acicular α' martensite if there are no sufficient successive depositions. This means that the last few layers of each Ti-6Al-4V sample fabricated by SLM under a similar processing condition are expected to show a martensitic structure, owing to the lack of successive depositions. This is confirmed by the microstructures shown in Fig 5, where the sample was additively manufactured by SLM under the same conditions as discussed above ( power, 375 W; layer thickness, 60 μm; laser scanning velocity, 1029 mm s1; FOD, 2 mm; E, 50.62 J mm3 ). Along the building direction, the sample experiences different history of cyclic thermal treatment during SLM. As a result, the bottom region consists of well-defined lamellar ( α + β ) structure, followed by much finer lamellar ( α + β ) in the middle region, while the last several layers is featured by α' martensite. Fig 6 shows the XRD spectra obtained from the middle cross section of each cube sample studied. The microstructures of S1, S3 and S7 are shown in Figs 1d, 2b and 2e, respectively. The absence of b in S1 implies that the decomposition of α' martensite was negligible by XRD, consistent with the full martensitic microstructure shown in Fig 1d. In contrast, a considerable amount of b phase was revealed in S3 by XRD. The pronounced b peak broadening is caused primarily by the nanometric width of the b phase. In conjunction with the microstructure shown in Fig 2b, the XRD result suggests that the majority of α' martensite phases have in situ decomposed into α and β, leading to the formation of an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure. Only a small amount of b phase was detected in S7 by XRD, confirming its dominant martensitic microstructure and the limited decomposition of some martensite phases into α and β. Fig 7a shows the engineering tensile stress-strain curves of the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V together with typical data from literature. As expected, SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V with a martensitic structure showed encouraging strength, but relatively low tensile elongation. In contrast, SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V with an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure via in situ martensite decomposition exhibited not only high yield strength, but also large tensile elongation to failure. These properties make the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V with an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure comparable to STA Ti-6Al-4V and superior to SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V with a martensitic structure and mill-annealed Ti-6Al-4V. The ductile nature of the ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure of Ti-6Al-4V was supported by its fracture surfaces, which show macroscopic rough cup-cone features and microscopic ductile dimples. Few pores were observed, owing to its near full density ( > 99.5% ). For comparison, Fig 9a shows the relatively flat fracture surface of S7 with a dominant martensitic structure. Closer examination revealed the existence of staircase-like features on the fracture surfaces. These observations are consistent with its low ductility shown in Fig 7a. However, fine dimples were observed in each staircase feature,suggesting that there was localized plastic deformation taking place during tensile loading. In the realm of SLM of Ti-6Al-4V, it is often recognized that the ultimate microstructure is dominated by α' martensite as a result of rapid cooling. Post-SLM heat treatment is thus needed to transform the α' martensite into α and β. This study has shown that tuning the SLM processing variables can result in substantial variations in the constituent phases, owing to the changed thermal profiles. In particular, through processing optimization, the SLM process can allow in situ decomposition of α' martensite to produce a novel ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure, which imparts high yield strength and ductility to the as-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V without post-SLM heat treatment. Both single layer and multilayer SLM depositions of Ti-6Al-4V under the optimized processing conditions confirmed the formation of the predominantly α' martensite as a result of the imposed high cooling rate. Detailed microstructural examination from the bottom to the top of an SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V sample under selected processing conditions corroborated the decomposition of α' martensite into ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) in the sample apart from the last few deposition layers in the top, where α' martensite was retained, owing to the lack of successive depositions. In situ decomposition of α' martensite was reported previously in a number of studies involving laser-based metal deposition of Ti-6Al-4V. However, the layer thickness employed was usually on the order of a few hundred micrometers to several millimeters, which implies a much slower cooling rate than that encountered during SLM. Thus, none of the previous studies achieved ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structures. During AM, the previously deposited layers are always affected by the thermal effect from the heating, melting and solidification ( latent heat ) of the successive layers. Unlike SLM, for AM of Ti-6Al-4V by SEBM, the powder-bed temperature is generally maintained 600 °C, which is higher than the martensitic transformation temperature. As a result, the as-fabricated microstructure is usually composed of normal lamellar ( α + β ), although in situ decomposition of α' martensite may have been involved, depending on the initial building temperature and the temperature rise induced by thermal cycling. To the authors’ knowledge,neither the concept of achieving an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure through exploiting in situ α' martensite decomposition nor the ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure itself has been reported before for SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V. To realize such a novel microstructure, it is essential to apply a proper laser energy input to repeatedly heat up the previously solidified layers to a temperature that favors in situ decomposition of martensite. Among the SLM variables, the energy density E is often tuned to control the average amount of energy input to minimize porosity. This study used energy density E to promote in situ decomposition of α' martensite into ultrafine α and β phases. However, the FOD, a variable rarely used so far by the SLM community for AM, can be used to effectively control the energy per unit volume delivered to the melt pool,whereE is referred to as effective energy density. A variation in the FOD affects the temperature profile in the sample. For instance, an increase in the FOD will increase the laser spot size, which will decreaseE', but increase the beam interaction time. A decrease inE' will cause a temperature drop, whereas an increase in beam interaction time will lead to a temperature rise. However, the effect of E' outdoes that of the beam interaction time, resulting in a decrease in the overall temperature. The temperature decrease reduces the cumulative residence time of one previously deposited layer in a temperature range within which α' martensite decomposes into α and β phases. The decrease in both overall temperature and cumulative residence time is unfavourable for significant in situ decomposition of α' martensite, In the case of layer thickness of 60 μm using FOD of 4 mm. To better clarify this phenomenon, thermal simulation on SLM with different processing variables is needed in a future study. As a result, control of the FOD offers another important means of manipulating the as-fabricated microstructure of Ti-6Al-4V, including realization of significant in situ martensite decomposition. This has been demonstrated by the results shown in Fig 2. However, it should be noted that adjusting a single processing variable such as the FOD may not be adequate to produce a reliable thermal profile for the in situ decomposition of α' martensite. Rather, a proper combination of the key processing variables is often needed. In situ heat treatment and its role in phase transformations in SLM-built Ti-6Al-4V. In view of the attendant ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure, it is reasonable to assume that the in situ martensite decomposition may have taken place at a relatively low temperature, as high-temperature heat treatment usually leads to a coarser microstructure. The well-established STA process, which involves quenching above beta transus and subsequent aging between 350 and 550 °C, produces fine ( α + β ) structures via decomposition of martensite for the manufacture of strong and ductile Ti-6Al-4V for demanding structural applications. The ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure achieved in this study is analogous to the STA microstructure, indicative of the significant potential of the proposed concept. In order to understand the approximate temperature necessary to enable in situ martensite decomposition during SLM, supplementary heat treatments were performed on samples of S1 from 350 to 930 °C, which had a martensitic structure in the SLM-fabricated state. Fig 10 shows the resulting microstructures heat treated at 400 °C, 540 °C and 800 °C for 120 min. The majority of the acicular α' martensitic structure was found to have transformed into an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure at 400 °C. The microstructure is similar to that observed in S3. It was further observed that heat treatment at 540 °C for 120 min was inadequate for some of the newly formed β phases to evolve into b lamellae. Instead, they were present as nanoscale dispersoids along the a boundaries, creating a unique form of microstructure. However, raising the temperature to 800 °C produced a well-developed coarse lamellar ( α + β ) structure with some globular a phases present at prior-β grain boundaries. The results shown in Fig 10 reveal that a near-complete martensite decomposition can be achieved at temperatures as low as 400 °C. This may serve as a point of reference for estimating the decomposition temperature of martensite during AM of Ti-6Al-4V by SLM. The ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure achieved in samples of S3, S4 and S8 indicates that the decomposition temperature is low and may be assumed to be 400 °C. The heat-treating time accumulated from the thermal cycling effect during SLM ultimately leads to a near-complete transformation of α' martensite into the ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure. Mechanical properties in SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V. For Ti-6Al-4V with a typical lamellar ( α + β ) structure, the average α lath thickness may be used as a characteristic length to assess its mechanical properties. Fig 11 summarizes the literature data on yield strength vs. The inverse square root of α lath thickness for Ti-6Al-4V. The relationship observed is analogous to the Hall-Petch relationship for most of the data reported. The yield strength of the ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure attained in this study is in line with this relationship. Fig 12 compares the yield strength vs. The total elongation to failure for Ti-6Al-4V fabricated by both conventional methods and AM methods. A general inverse relationship exists between yield strength and tensile ductility. The SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V with an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure stands out from the trend and exhibits a superior combination of yield strength and tensile ductility comparable with that of STA Ti-6Al-4V. Ti-6Al-4V fabricated by SLM often consists of columnar prior-β grains filled with acicular α' martensite, and usually displays high yield strength, but limited ductility. Enlightened by STA Ti-6Al-4V, which consists of fine lamellar α and β arising from the decomposition of α' martensite and exhibits outstanding mechanical properties, this study was motivated to produce a novel ultrafine lamellar α and β microstructure in the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V to offer mechanical properties comparable with or better than that of the forged Ti-6Al-4V. The following conclusions can be drawn. In situ α' martensite decomposition can be realized during AM of Ti-6Al-4V by SLM to transform the undesired martensitic structure into an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure. This is the first study that has realized in situ martensite decomposition based on the understanding of the α' martensite decomposition and fine tuning of the SLM variables, in particular the layer thickness, laser beam FOD and energy density. Post-SLM heat treatment of purposely prepared Ti-6Al-4V samples at a series of temperatures from 350 to 930 °C indicates that the decomposition of α' martensite takes place at temperatures as low as 400 °C. The heat treatment time accumulated from the thermal cycling effect during SLM has proved to be sufficient to lead to a near-complete transformation of α' martensite into ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ). The attainment of the ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure in the SLM-fabricated state results in not only high yield strength, but also large elongation to failure. These properties make the SLM-fabricated Ti-6Al-4V with an ultrafine lamellar ( α + β ) structure comparable with STA Ti-6Al-4V and superior to mill-annealed Ti-6Al-4V
Cost-affordable Ti-6Al-4V for additive manufacturing: Powder modification, compositional modulation and laser in-situ alloying. Ti-6Al-4V is the single most important Ti alloy, accounting for use in almost 60% of all the applications of Ti materials. Additive manufacturing ( AM ) offers design freedom with regard to Ti-6Al-4V for creation of high-quality, customized products. However, the large-scale development of this technology is constrained by the high raw material costs. In this study, a method based on ball milling powder modification was proposed to convert low cost, non-spherical hydrogenated-dehydrogenated Ti ( HDH-Ti ) powder into spherical, printable Ti powder. Following mechanical mixing, the ball-milled HDH-Ti powder was further blended with elemental powders of aluminum and vanadium to develop low-cost HDH Ti-6Al-4V. Simultaneously, the issue pertaining to high oxygen associated with HDH Ti-6Al-4V was addressed via introduction of yttrium. A cost-affordable, high-performance AM Ti-6Al-4V alloy was finally developed via laser-based powder bed fusion of metals ( PBF-LB/M ) after printing parameter optimization and heat treatment. The AM-prepared Ti-6Al-4V demonstrated a relative density of 99.3%, an ultimate tensile strength of ~1083 MPa, and an elongation of 9%, comparable to those obtained using costly pre-alloyed powders. Further, numerical simulation and detailed microstructural characterization were performed to reveal the underlying echanism. Powder modification, compositional modulation, and laser in-situ alloying were the three essentials techniques used as part of this approach for optimizing the mechanical properties of the Ti-6Al-4V alloy. Overall, this method demonstrates excellent potential in terms of mitigating the high cost. Moreover, it may further promote research on AM of a variety of Ti alloys besides Ti-6Al-4V. Titanium ( Ti ) and Ti alloys are widely used in aerospace, biomedical, and other fields of advanced engineering, where low density, high specific strength, biocompatibility, and excellent corrosion resistance are essential. Among the various Ti materials, Ti-6Al-4V accounts for use in almost 60% of all the applications. As one of the most advanced processing methods for Ti and Ti alloys, laser-based powder bed fusion of metals ( PBF-LB/M ), a mainstream additive manufacturing ( AM ) technology, has proven its tremendous potential in achieving a near-net-shape and customization, especially for parts with complex geometries. Raw materials suitable for PBF-LB/M, however, are mostly pre-alloyed spherical powders made by gas atomizer and/or plasma rotating electrode processes. Spherical powders are used mainly because of their better flowability. In contrast, irregularly shaped powders do not flow easily and tend to be mechanically interlocked and entangled, which hinders their flow on the powder bed. Several factors, including low yield ratio of the fine, printable powder and expensive experimental consumables, result in the pre-alloyed spherical powders being rather costly, which seriously reduces their competitiveness and limits their commercial scale-up. A lausible solution to this problem is to use mechanically mixed, low-cost elemental powders for the AM processing. A few studies using powder mixture rather than pre-alloyed powder for fusion-based AM processing have been previously reported. Simonelli et al. studied the behavior of a powder mixture consisting of spherical Ti powder and pure Al and V powders to prepare Ti-6Al-4V by PBF-LB/M. Wang et al. used gas-atomized pure Ti powder and mechanically crushed Nb powder to prepare Ti-Nb alloys via PBF-LB/M. Wang et al. prepared Ni-Ti shape memory alloys via PBF-LB/M, selective electron beam melting, and directed energy deposition, which were all based on the powder mixture of gas-atomized, spherical Ti powder and pure Ni powder; it was found that directed energy deposition is the most suitable approach among the three AM methods. In-situ alloying has also been employed to prepare more complex alloy systems, including Ti-6Al-7Nb , Ti-22Al-25Nb , and high-entropy TiZrNbTa alloys. These studies, however, have all depended on atomized, spherical Ti powder, which is almost as costly as spherical pre-alloyed powders. Therefore, the issue regarding cost-effectiveness persists. In addition, several other critical issues, including the method to use for mitigating a high impurity concentration that is often associated with the low-cost raw powder feedstock, have not yet been addressed in the aforementioned studies. Meanwhile, it has been found that the price of commercially available hydrogenation-dehydrogenation Ti ( HDH-Ti ) powder is approximately 1/7th of that of the pre-alloyed atomized powder. It has a highly irregular morphology, shows low flowability, and can often not at all be used for direct printing in the unmodified condition. Our previous research, however, has proved that modified HDH-Ti powder can actually be printed to achieve excellent mechanical performance. In consideration of the importance of the Ti-6Al-4V alloy, low-cost, high-performance Ti-6Al-4V based on the modified HDH-Ti powder can be regarded as a breakthrough to address the feedstock problem. For such a study, at least the following three aspects should be involved: ( a ) Feasibility study in terms of printability of the powder blend consisting of modified HDH-Ti powder, and elemental Al and V powders. ( b ) Compositional optimization: Typically, HDH-Ti powder has a higher oxygen impurity ( ~ 0.3 wt.% ) than that of the atomized powders, which needs to be addressed to ensure that the as-printed Ti-6Al-4V ( which can only contain a maximum oxygen content of 0.2 wt. % as per the ASTM B381-13 standard ) exhibits sufficiently high mechanical performance. In terms of impurity mitigation, rare earth ( RE )-based materials such as pure RE, RE borides, and/or RE hydrides can be the candidate materials. ( c ) Laser in-situ alloying during the PBF-LB/M processing: It still needs to be verified that in-situ alloying can occur between the Ti powder and the alloying elements, namely Al and V, in the case of Ti-6Al-4V during the rapid metallurgical reaction. The objective of this work is to demonstrate a new, easily implementable approach to develop a high performance Ti-6Al-4V alloy via AM, based on low-cost Ti powder and performance control; if careful process optimization and compositional modification are simultaneously employed, the printability of the powder blend can be improved. Further, compositional homogeneity is achieved after printing, and the mechanical properties of the resultant alloy are comparable to those of the as-printed Ti-6Al-4V based on commercial atomized powders. The following points are demonstrated in this study: ( a ) Using a ball-milling based powder modification method, non-spherical powder was modified into a printable spherical HDH-Ti powder; ( b ) Modification of the as-received HDH-Ti powder to enhance its printability for PBF-LB/M, and subsequently, to prepare a powder mixture consisting of Ti, Al, and V for developing a low-cost Ti-6Al-4V alloy; ( c ) Optimization of laser printing parameters to attain highly dense Ti-6Al-4V with a relative density of ~99.3%; and ( d ) Mitigation of high amount of impurities in the HDH-Ti powder with the help of oxygen getter elements, such as Y. Moreover, the resultant Ti-6Al-4V possesses a tensile strength of ~1083 MPa and an elongation of 9%, at a cost of merely 1/7th of that of commercial atomized powder, thus making it affordable
Cost-affordable, high-performance Ti-TiB composite for selective laser melting additive manufacturing. Titanium and its alloys are probably the most suitable materials for selective laser melting ( SLM ) additive manufacturing to process. However, the high cost of raw powder materials limits the industrial application of as-printed Ti products. In this study, we have formulated a cost-affordable Ti-TiB composite powder for SLM, to simultaneously achieve excellent mechanical performance and cost effectiveness. The optimization of the processing parameters will be shown to lead to high relative density ( 99.3% ) for the as-printed Ti-TiB composites containing ( 0.5, 1, and 2 wt% ) TiB2. Furthermore, by incorporating TiB2, the as-printed composites exhibit much improved fracture strength ( up to 1813 MPa ) and microhardness ( up to 412 HV ), among which the Ti - 0.5 wt% TiB2 has demonstrated a great combination of strength ( 1007 and 1646 MPa as yield and fracture strengths, respectively ) and tensile ductility ( ~8% ). The solidification pathway for the Ti-TiB composite during SLM has been investigated, and the underlying mechanism for achieving high yield strength is discussed based on existing models for shear-lag strengthening, grain refinement, and dispersion strengthening. Titanium and its alloys possess advantages in terms of low density, high specific strength, excellent biocompatibility, low Young's modulus, and good corrosion resistance, thus exhibiting competitiveness in applications in aerospace, biomedical, and other fields of advanced engineering. However, their relatively low hardness and weak tribological performance restrict them from wider applications. To improve their mechanical performance, ceramic particles or whiskers have been introduced into Ti matrices. TiB has a similar coefficient of linear expansion to that of the Ti matrix and is capable of providing a higher Young's modulus and hardness, improved creep and fatigue properties, and grain size refinement. It can be also incorporated with Ti via in situ reaction to ensure good metallurgical bonding, thus being considered as one of the most applicable reinforcement materials for developing advanced Ti matrix composites ( TMCs ). Meanwhile, it is known that Titanium and its alloys are difficult to manufacture via conventional processing methods because of their crystallographical nature, high chemical reactivity, and low thermal conductivity. One of the most promising solutions to these problems is advanced processing methods that can realize the potential of Ti materials. Selective laser melting ( SLM ) additive manufacturing ( AM ) is one effective technique and is based on a completely different philosophy to that of material removal processing. During SLM processing, a component is "printed" layer-by-layer, with each layer being; 30 lm thin, by a high-power laser and is eventually "stacked" to its final form. SLM has been proven to be capable of producing delicate parts of mechanical performance comparable to those produced using conventional approaches such as casting and even forging. SLM has also been well demonstrated to have the potential to fabricate high-performance TMC parts with homogeneously dispersed ceramic particles. However, the wider application of SLM technology has been delayed because of the high cost of, in particular, raw materials, which are spherical or near spherical powders that are often made via atomization techniques such as gas atomization and plasma rotating electrode process. A recent contribution to solving the raw material problem has been detailed in our previous study, proving that it is possible to use powder modification to provide ultralow-cost, commercially pure titanium ( CP-Ti ) powder for SLM, via an approach that is based on using originally irregular, unprintable hydrogenation–dehydrogenation titanium ( HDH-Ti ) powder. The possibility of further developing advanced composite materials, such as Ti-TiB, based on the low-cost Ti powder is yet to be explored. In this research, ball milling was used to modify the HDH-Ti powder, and a systematic study on the influence of TiB2 addition on the microstructural characteristics and phase evolution of Ti-TiB composites was conducted. To realize cost-affordable, printable Ti materials for SLM and achieve the highest possible mechanical performance, the processing parameters were optimized. Moreover, the phase constitution, microstructure, microhardness, and tensile and compressive strengths of the SLM-prepared composites were investigated. Through this study, we will show that it is possible to develop cost-affordable, almost fully dense (  > 99.3% ), high-strength Ti-TiB composites via in situ SLM alloying. The underlying mechanism for achieving high mechanical performance is discussed through existing plastic deformation models. Figure 1 shows the powder modification process and the corresponding illustrative schematic graph. It can be found that the original HDH-Ti powders are of fragmented shapes and that the TiB2 particles are also irregular. After powder modification of the ( HDH-Ti + TiB2 ) mixture, the edges of the original HDH-Ti particles have become smooth and spheroidized and have even disappeared. Furthermore, after the modification, the Ti-TiB2 powder mixture can be spread evenly onto the building substrate. It is printable, similar to what we found in our previous findings on the modification of the HDH-Ti powder. The related flowability parameters of the powder mixture are listed in Table SI, showing improved flowability index ( 83 versus 68 ) between the modified and unmodified powders, respectively, and are consistent with the morphology variation observed. Moreover, it is found that the TiB2 particles are uniformly dispersed on the surface of the modified Ti powder; see the scanning electron microscope ( SEM ) image in Fig 1 ( d ) and energy-dispersive X-ray ( EDX ) elemental mapping for Ti and B in Figs 1 ( e ) and 1 ( f ), respectively. Figure 1 ( f ) of the B analysis shows some regions with a slightly brighter contrast, which should correspond to the added TiB2 particles. The modification process is further illustrated in Fig 1 ( g ). In this study, we have offered a powder modification approach for developing cost-affordable, high-performance Ti composite materials for SLM. The effects of different amounts of TiB2 on microstructural evolution and mechanical properties of the as printed Ti 1 TiB2 composites have been systematically studied and then discussed based on existing material strengthening models. The main conclusions from this research are as follows: ( 1 ) Nearly fully dense Ti-TiB composite materials ( relative density; 99.3% ) are obtained at a laser power of 70 W, scanning speed of 300 mm/s, and energy density of 64 J / mm3. The composite powder is a mixture of modified ultralow-cost HDH-Ti and micrometer-sized TiB2 particle. ( 2 ) Microstructure analysis has confirmed that the incorporated TiB2 particles in situ react with Ti to form whisker-like TiB, along with evident grain refinement particularly when the TiB2 concentration is increased from 0.5 wt% to 2 wt%. The as-printed composites exhibit much improved fracture strength ( up to 1813 MPa ) and microhardness ( up to 412 HV ). The Ti-0.5 wt% TiB2 has demonstrated a great combination of fracture strength ( 1007 MPa ), tensile ductility ( 8% ), and microhardness ( 340 HV ). ( 3 ) Analysis of the strengthening mechanism suggests that shear-lag strengthening, grain refinement, and dispersion strengthening all have contributed to the enhanced yield strength of the as-printed Ti-TiB composite, suggesting that the strength of the as-printed Ti-TiB material can be predicted using existing deformation models for metal matrix composites.