The precipitation and distribution behaviors of in situ-formed titanium boride whiskers (TiB) in TiBw-reinforced Ti-6%Al-4%V (Ti64) composites fabricated from an elemental mixture of Ti64 alloy powder and TiB2 particles by selective laser melting were investigated. The primary precipitation of TiB whiskers strongly depends on B content. For a B content of less than 2 mass%, when the liquid ! β-phase transformation occurred and B atoms were discharged, the B-enriched area formed around the β-phase resulted in the generation of TiB whiskers and their agglomeration at the prior β-grain boundaries. When the B content was over 2 mass%, TiB whiskers directly precipitated from the liquid phase and moved to the molten pool boundary via Marangoni convection. As a result, the TiB whiskers were located along the boundary. Furthermore, B-enrichment caused a decrease in the liquidus temperature and thus obstructed β-grain coarsening, and as a result, fine equiaxed α’-grains formed during the phase transformation.
Laser powder bed fusion (LPBF) is one of the most promising additive manufacturing technologies to fabricate high quality metal parts. In this work, a three-phase model based on the volume of fluid (VOF) is employed to investigate the heat transfer and melt pool behaviour in LPBF. Surface tension, Marangoni effect and recoil pressure are implemented in the model, and heat adsorption, reflection and transmission are fully considered. The results show that the melt pool dimension and its shape are controlled by laser power and scanning speed. Metal powders at the bottom layers may be not fully melted, and for larger layer thickness of the powder bed, porosities caused by the trapped gas can form. The gas originated from bulk powders can dissolve, coalesce, and be squeezed in the melt pool. It is demonstrated that the model can capture the main features of powder melting and solidification in LPBF process.
Improving the ductility of manufactured Ti-based alloys by selective laser melting (SLM) while still maintaining the high mechanical strength is one of the major challenges in additive manufacturing. In this work, a systematic investigation on the process parameters for achieving such a material is performed. By employing the optimal parameters during SLM, the fabrication of strong and ductile Ti6Al4V alloys was achieved. The ultimate tensile strength of SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloy was measured as 1170 MPa, while the elongation to failure remained over 10%. Through analysis of the microstructure and mechanical properties of the SLM-built Ti6Al4V alloy, it was found that the process parameters play an essential role in the tensile behavior, in particular the ductility of SLMbuilt Ti alloy. The considerable enhancement of the mechanical properties in our work is mainly attributed to the limitation of martensite formation and the minimization of pores.
Novel ultrafine lamellar (α + β) microstructures comprising ultrafine (~200–300 nm) α-laths and retained β phases were created via promoting in situ decomposition of a near α' martensitic structure in Ti–6Al–4V additively manufactured by selective laser melting (SLM). As a consequence, the total tensile elongation to failure reached 11.4% while maintaining high yield strength above 1100 MPa, superior to both conventional SLM-fabricated Ti–6Al–4V containing non-equilibrium acicular a0 martensite and conventional mill-annealed Ti–6Al–4V. The formation and decomposition of a0 martensite in additively manufactured Ti–6Al–4V was studied via specially designed experiments including single-track deposition, multi-layer deposition and post-SLM heat treatment. The essential SLM additive manufacturing conditions for Ti–6Al–4V including layer thickness, focal offset distance and energy density, under which a near α' martensitic structure forms in each layer and then in situ transforms into ultrafine lamellar (α + β) structures, were determined. This is the first fundamental effort that has realized complete in situ martensite decomposition in SLM-fabricated Ti–6Al–4V for outstanding mechanical properties.
Commercially pure titanium was produced using laser engineered net shaping (LENS) and selective laser melting (SLM) processes. The SLM and LENS processing parameters as well as critical aspects including densification and balling effect were investigated. The resulting properties were studied and compared with those from traditional casting. Investigation of the processing parameters showed that significantly higher laser power and energy density is required in LENS compared to SLM in order to obtain near full density (99.5%). The microstructural investigations revealed an α microstructure with mixed morphologies including plate-like and widmanstätten for LENS somewhat similar to the serrated and fine acicular α obtained from casting. In contrast, the SLM samples showed only martensitic α′ phase mainly with a lath-type morphology. The difference between SLM and LENS microstructures was discussed based on interrelated aspects including energy density, solidification rate and specific point energy. Differences in their microstructures are mainly associated with differing rates of cooling and differing energy densities during SLM and LENS processing. Compression and hardness tests indicated that SLM titanium possesses better mechanical properties due to a fine grain size and martensitic phase composition, whereas LENS and cast titanium with α microstructures show similar mechanical properties.
Ti-6Al-4V is the single most important Ti alloy, accounting for use in almost 60% of all the applications of Ti materials. Additive manufacturing (AM) offers design freedom with regard to Ti-6Al-4V for creation of highquality, customized products. However, the large-scale development of this technology is constrained by the high raw material costs. In this study, a method based on ball milling powder modification was proposed to convert low cost, non-spherical hydrogenated-dehydrogenated Ti (HDH-Ti) powder into spherical, printable Ti powder. Following mechanical mixing, the ball-milled HDH-Ti powder was further blended with elemental powders of aluminum and vanadium to develop low-cost HDH Ti-6Al-4V. Simultaneously, the issue pertaining to high oxygen associated with HDH Ti-6Al-4V was addressed via introduction of yttrium. A cost-affordable, highperformance AM Ti-6Al-4V alloy was finally developed via laser-based powder bed fusion of metals (PBF-LB/M) after printing parameter optimization and heat treatment. The AM-prepared Ti-6Al-4V demonstrated a relative density of 99.3%, an ultimate tensile strength of ~1083 MPa, and an elongation of 9%, comparable to those obtained using costly pre-alloyed powders. Further, numerical simulation and detailed microstructural characterization were performed to reveal the underlying mechanism. Powder modification, compositional modulation, and laser in-situ alloying were the three essential techniques used as part of this approach for optimizing the mechanical properties of the Ti-6Al-4V alloy. Overall, this method demonstrates excellent potential in terms of mitigating the high cost. Moreover, it may further promote research on AM of a variety of Ti alloys besides Ti-6Al-4V. 
Ti-13Nb-13Zr alloy was fabricated by selective laser melting (SLM), and the densification, microstructure evolution, nanohardness, tensile strength and fatigue behavior of the alloy were systematically investigated. A narrow, feasible process window (laser power 325 W, scanning speed 1000 mm/s, scanning distance 0.13 mm, and layer thickness 0.03 mm) was accordingly determined. With the increase of scanning speed, the coarse acicularshaped α′ grains changed to refined acicular-shaped α′ grains and then defect formed in the microstructure. The optimally prepared Ti-13Nb-13Zr sample had a very high hardness of 519.448 HV and tensile strength of 1106.07 MPa, which are superior higher than that prepared by traditional thermomechanical technique (280 ± 15 HV and 732 MPa). Owing to the change of BCC to HCP structure ([111] β→ [1-21-3] α′), the accumulation of dislocations and the finer grains, the SLM-processed samples exhibited higher fatigue strength than that the alloy processed by cast and was commensurate with the cast Ti-6Al-4 V. Moreover, the influences of phase transition on fatigue behavior have been discussed carefully.
Commercially pure titanium, as a widely used metallic biomaterial, was fabricated using dissimilar additive manufacturing (AM) methods, namely selective laser melting (SLM), laser engineered net shaping (LENS) and wire arc additive manufacturing (WAAM). Microstructures as well as mechanical and wear properties of the produced titanium samples were studied. Diverse microstructural features were related to the different linear energy densities and cooling rates induced by each AM method. Tensile testing evaluation indicated the highest yield and ultimate tensile strengths as well as elastic energy for titanium produced by SLM. However, the maximum ductility was obtained in the WAAM-fabricated titanium due to its larger grain size and slightly higher densification. All the mechanical properties obtained were either superior or comparable to those of cast and powder metallurgy produced titanium. Fracture surface analysis showed the presence of mainly coarse and fine dimples for WAAM and SLM-produced samples, respectively. This was consistent with the grain size of each sample. Wear performances and mechanisms were also examined and the results were in agreement with the values obtained from the hardness to elastic modulus ratios (H/E and H3/E2).
Micro-fine sphericalpowders are recommended for selective laser melting (SLM). However, they are mostly expensive due to the complex manufacturing technique and low yield. In this paper, using lowcost treated hydride-dehydride (HDH) Ti powders, commercial pure Ti (CP-Ti) was successfully fabricated by SLM. After 4-h milling, the resulting powders become near-spherical with no obvious angularity, and have optimal flowability with the apparent density of 1.64 ± 0.02 g/cm3, tap density of 2.10 ± 0.04 g/cm3, angle of repose 40.11◦±0.09◦, and Carr’s index of 77.74 ± 0.15. The microstructure was determined with full acicular martensitic α' phase. The CP-Ti can achieve superior mechanical properties with the ultimate tensile strength of 876.1 ± 20.5 MPa and elongation of (14.7 ± 0.5)%, which exhibit distinctly competitive compared to the as-cast CP-Ti or Ti-6Al-4V. Excellent mechanical properties together with its low-cost make SLM-fabricated CP-Ti from modified HDH Ti powders show promising applications.
Fluidized bed was used to treat low-cost hydride-dehydride Ti powders. Properties and microstructures of powders were investigated in terms of surface morphology, particle size distribution, flowability, interstitial content and surface oxidation behavior. The results showed the modified morphology and particle size distribution benefit its flowability after treating. The mechanisms of flowability improvement and oxidation behavior are also discussed. The powder flowability is improved to 35.2 ± 0.3 s/50 g, while its oxygen increment is negligible for the Ti powders after treating at 450 °C for 10 min. This study offers a cost-effective process to produce Ti powders for potential use in additive manufacturing.
Commercially pure titanium (CP-Ti) has received a great deal of attention in medical applications. Improvement of its mechanical properties plays a key role in enhancing the biomechanical compatibility of Ti implants, leading to avoid revision surgeries. Emerging advanced manufacturing technologies such as selective laser melting (SLM) is providing an ideal platform for producing components with almost no geometric constraints and is economically feasible down to a batch size of one. This study presents the results of using SLM to produce CP-Ti parts starting from powder with a wide grain size range up to 100 μm. Accurate manipulation of SLM manufacturing parameters were applied to produce nearly full dense (>99.5%) CP-Ti parts without any post-treatments. Compared with the properties of those manufactured by traditional processing technologies, the microhardness, compressive, and tensile strengths of SLM-processed CP-Ti parts have been improved to 261 Hv, 1136 MPa, and 757 MPa, respectively, due to the formation of refined martensitic α′ grains during SLM. The optimal manufacturing parameters could enhance the strength and hardness of CP-Ti and yet maintaining the ductility of titanium. Fractography study of the tensile-failed SLM-processed specimens showed that incompletely melted particles and porosities caused early fracture in porous sample. Mixture of dimples and minor quasi-cleavage facets covered most fracture surface of full dense sample.
In this study, the corrosion behavior and mechanism of Ti-6Al-4V in artificial saliva with Candida albicans were investigated using electrochemical and surface analysis techniques. Fluorescence microscopy (FM) and confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) showed that C. albicans could easily adsorb on the surface of Ti-6Al-4V alloy to form non-dense biofilm. The non-compact biofilm provided necessary conditions for pitting corrosion on Ti-6Al-4V alloys by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) observation. The potentiodynamic polarization (PDP) curves and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) revealed that C. albicans significantly reduced the corrosion resistance of Ti-6Al-4V alloys. The cyclic voltammetry (CV) and differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) results indicated that C. albicans biofilm promoted electron transfer from the anodic sites to cathodic depolarizer during the corrosion process, showing that the role of oral fungi must be considered when evaluating the performance of oral materials. This study may provide a new clue for evaluating the corrosion resistance of dental implant materials in the oral environment.
Ti–6Al–4V alloys have been widely adopted because of their good mechanical properties. TIG welding is a common method for Ti–6Al–4V alloys. However, the high heat input of conventional TIG can lead to a coarsening of grains within Ti–6Al–4V and thus a weaker Ti–6Al–4V weld. This study presents a novel fast-frequency pulsed tungsten inert gas (FFP-TIG) welding technology to fabricate a high-reliability Ti–6Al–4V weld. The effects of fast-frequency pulsed waveforms on microstructures and mechanical properties of Ti–6Al–4V weld samples were uncovered. The arc core diameter of FFP-TIG technology was reduced by 32%–36% compared with that of conventional TIG. The adoption of FFP-TIG decreased the average grain sizes and acicular martensite α′ within the Ti–6Al–4V weld by 47.7% and 40.5%, respectively, which further enhanced the mechanical properties of the corresponding weldments. The hardness, tensile strength, and elongation of Ti–6Al–4V weldments obtained by FFP-TIG were improved by 10.35%, 13.84%, and 304.61% compared with those obtained by conventional TIG, achieving the highest value of 373 HV, 1018.97 MPa, and 4.301%, respectively. This study provides fresh insight into the development and application of high-reliability titanium alloy weldments commonly used in the aviation industry.
Ti–6Al–4V alloys have been widely adopted in the aerospace, petrochemical, shipbuilding, and automotive industries due to their ideal mechanical nature [1,2]. Tungsten inert gas (TIG) welding has been one of the most widely used means of titanium welding because it provides welders with a high level of process control to prevent defect formation and ensure quality [[3], [4], [5]]. However, the high heat input of conventional TIG can lead to coarsened grains within Ti–6Al–4V and thus a weaker Ti–6Al–4V weld. The development and application of advanced TIG is an attractive strategy to refine the microstructure and enhance mechanical properties of Ti–6Al–4V weld [[6], [7], [8], [9]]. This study introduces a high-frequency pulsed current in TIG to achieve the above strategy. The high-frequency pulsed current would shrink the arc and stir the molten metal by electromagnetic effect to refine grain sizes, avoid defect formation, and improve mechanical properties of welding joints [10,11].
Due to the radial electromagnetic contraction force generated by the high-frequency pulse current, a significant radial contraction of the arc plasma and an increase in arc pressure can be detected. Wang et al. [12] proposed a fully coupled plasma-acoustic 3D mathematical model to analyze the generation, propagation, and attenuation of ultrasonic waves in weakly ionized arc plasma and concluded that ultrasound could significantly promote the concentration and acceleration of arc plasma at 20 kHz and 30 kHz. Compared with conventional TIG welding, the arc plasma of high-frequency welding has a higher energy density and greater penetration, which can realize efficient high-energy welding [13].
Wang et al. [14] showed that ultrasonic frequency double-pulsed VP-TIG has advantages in controlling the weld penetration depth. Researchers have applied a high-frequency pulsed current to solve the problem of mechanical property decline during the welding process and servicing of Ti–6Al–4V alloy due to the negative effects of grain coarsening. Sundaresan et al. [15] carried out research on the microstructure refinement of the fusion zone of Ti–6Al–4V welding by applying DC pulses and AC pulses in conventional TIG. Balasubramanian et al. [16] applied an experimental concept design to improve experimental parameters in pulsed TIG. Mehdi et al. [17] indicated that when compared with the results of nonpulsed TIG, the tensile residual stress level within the pulsed process decreased. The tensile residual stress magnitude decreased with increasing pulse frequency. Yang et al. [18] applied a fast-frequency (10–80 kHz) pulsed current on TIG to refine grains and improve the mechanical properties of Ti–6Al–4V alloy weldments. Vaithiyanathan et al. [19] used gas tungsten constricted arc welding with a high-frequency pulsed waveform to reduce the Ti–6Al–4V alloy welding heat input and avoid welding pores.
Based on the above studies, the high-frequency pulsed current has the effect of refining grains and improving mechanical properties. However, a single pulsed waveform limits the effect of pulsed TIG on refining grain sizes and improving mechanical properties.
The solution we adopted to address this problem is to introduce fast-frequency pulsed current in TIG. This novel welding method is defined as fast-frequency pulsed tungsten inert gas (FFP-TIG) welding.
The FFP-TIG welding waveform is a high-frequency double-pulsed current superimposed on a low-frequency direct current (fast-frequency pulsed current), while the conventional high-frequency pulsed waveform is a high-frequency single-pulsed current superimposed on a low-frequency pulsed current. Thus, fast-frequency pulsed current in FFP-TIG has the advantages of both a high-frequency pulsed current and a double-pulsed current, which can further refine the grain size and improve the mechanical properties of the weldment.
Meanwhile, in conventional high-frequency TIG welding, it is difficult to solve the problem of output welding current waveform distortion caused by superimposed fast-frequency components in the output welding current. In other words, the welding waveforms in the abovementioned works were not regular square waveforms.
The advantages of the high-frequency TIG welding in reducing grain sizes and improving mechanical properties are limited. At present, researchers have adopted conventional Si-based power semiconductor devices as power supply devices for welding Ti–6Al–4V alloy.
Onuki et al. [20] selected an insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) as the main power device to develop a welding power supply, which could generate welding waveforms with a 20 kHz high frequency and a 500 A high-peak pulsed current. Leary et al. [21] assessed the performance of the IP50-HMS developed by VBC Instrument Engineering, which successfully joined very thin walls, small-diameter titanium, and stainless-steel alloy heat exchanger tubes. However, the welding waveforms in the above works were not regular square waveforms because of the strong electromagnetic interference generated by the 20 kHz pulsed current. A fast-frequency pulsed current waveform can cause strong electromagnetic interference to the FFP-TIG welding power supply, which can result in an unstable welding current and poor control of the welding arc.
Zhou et al. [22] introduced a novel adaptive PID controller with automatic switching to solve the problem of output current waveform distortion caused by superimposed high-frequency components in the output current of a variable polarity plasma arc welding (VPPAW) power supply. In recent years, third-generation wide-bandgap SiC power semiconductor devices have been further developed. Wang et al. [23] used SiC power semiconductor devices as the main power source to develop an LLC resonant converter in a plasma power supply, which was preferred in operation under conditions of high frequency and high voltage. Wolski et al. [24] designed a 100-kHz/6-kW quasi-Z-source inverter built with SiC power semiconductor devices; the losses were reduced by 1%, and efficiency reached 97% under nominal conditions, even for a high voltage boost.
Using SiC power semiconductor devices, the inverter frequency of the FFP-TIG welding power supply can be increased to more than 100 kHz, which can improve the stability and reliability of the FFP-TIG welding power supply. Based on SiC power semiconductor devices, our research group developed a fast-frequency SiC FFP-TIG welding power supply that can output regular fast-frequency pulsed waveforms at 10–30 kHz to weld Ti–6Al–4V alloy.
The superiority of successful high-frequency TIG welding has not been exploited in the welding domain. The challenging problems that arise in this domain are high-frequency TIG welding current waveform distortion and data insufficiency of the fast-frequency pulsed current.
To fill this research gap and enhance the effectiveness and reliability of high-frequency TIG welding, this paper presented a novel SiC FFP-TIG welding power supply and studies the effects of fast-frequency pulsed current amplitude and frequency on the characteristics of arc behavior, weld formation, microstructure, and mechanical properties of Ti–6Al–4V alloy FFP-TIG weldment. In this study, the weldments were technologically characterized regarding their microstructure and mechanical properties, concluding the possibility of applying FFP-TIG in the welding repair industry, thus promoting the improvement of metal weldments. These findings would be used to determine a potential manufacturing strategy to improve the mechanical properties of Ti–6Al–4V alloy through FFP-TIG. This study lays a foundation and provides data support for the grain refinement and mechanical property improvement of other metal material weldments.